
Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 22029-h.htm or 22029-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/2/0/2/22029/22029-h/22029-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/2/0/2/22029/22029-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/spoolknitting00mccorich





SPOOL KNITTING

by

MARY A. McCORMACK







[Illustration]



New York
A. S. Barnes & Company
1909
Copyright, 1909
by A. S. Barnes & Company.




CONTENTS

                                      PAGE

  Spool Knitting                         1
  Toy Knitters                           3
  Round Web                              5
  Flat Web                               7
  Circular Mat                           9
  Ball for Baby                         11
  Doll's Muff                           13
  Collarette                            15
  Tom O' Shanter Cap                    17
  Baby's Rattle                         19
  Toboggan Cap                          21
  Child's Bath or Bedroom Slippers      23
  Small Mittens                         25
  Doll's Hood                           27
  Doll's Coat or Jacket                 29
  Bootees                               33
  Little Boy Blue                       35
  Little Red Riding Hood                37
  Doll's Skirt                          39
  Little Boy's Hat                      41
  Child's Muffler                       43
  Child's Hood                          45
  Little Girl's Hat                     47
  Doll's Sweater                        49
  Wristlets                             51
  Shoulder Shawl                        53
  Doll's Carriage Robe                  55
  Child's Leggings                      57
  Muffler                               59
  Made of Knitting Cotton               61
  Jumping Rope                          63
  Toy Horse Reins                       65
  Wash Cloth                            67
  School Bag                            69
  Chimney Cleaner                       71
  Doll's Hammock                        73




[Illustration]

SPOOL KNITTING


Few elementary exercises have aroused more interest in the child than
the toy knitting; due, perhaps, to its simplicity and his power to do it
easily and well.

To some keen observer the little orb-weaving spider may have suggested
this form of occupation. Be this as it may, the child who is a lover of
nature will be quick to perceive the strong resemblance he bears to this
little insect while at work with his toy knitter, going from post to
post just as the insect worked its net in spiral form on his framework
of radiating lines.

The possibilities of an empty spool and a few pins are almost without
limitations. The illustrations here given are merely suggestive of many
more that can be worked out along these lines. They are not simply to
momentarily attract the child, but to permit of individual growth, and
to have him participate in the joy of its ultimate use.




[Illustration]

Toy Knitters


Toy knitters are made of a cylindrical piece of wood two and one-half or
three inches long and at least one inch in diameter. This size enables
the child to grasp it easily and work without cramping the fingers. A
hole one-fourth or one-half inch in diameter is bored lengthwise through
the center to admit the work. Spools are used to advantage where
knitters cannot be obtained.

Pins, staples, or wire nails are used as posts. These are driven into
the wood and then curved outward a little at the top with pliers, to
prevent the work from slipping off. One, two, three or four posts may be
used.

A number of forms of web can be made, but the simplest and quickest are
those made on the knitters having but two posts. The four-post knitters
are also simple and are used where a thick cord is needed.

Except otherwise specified two-post knitters are used for these models.




[Illustration]

Round Web


Drop worsted through the hole in the center of the knitter and draw it
out at the other end, three inches. This end is used to draw the work
through the knitter. Carry the worsted leading from the ball, around the
post to the right, across the center of the hole in the knitter and
around the post to the left; then back across the center to the post at
the right, thus making two stitches on this post. Lift the lower or
first stitch with a large pin or knitting needle, carry it over the
second stitch and drop it over the post; then across the center to the
post at the left and repeat. So continue until the desired length is
obtained.

It will require seven yards of yarn to make one yard of web on the
two-post knitter.




[Illustration]

Flat Web


Begin in the same way as for round web, but after carrying the first or
lower stitch over the second stitch on each post, bring the worsted back
around the same post, and over to the post on the opposite side and
repeat. This will leave two stitches on each post. In knitting flat
webs, two stitches must always be left on the end posts, and these two
are carried over the third stitch and dropped over the post in working
back and forth.

It requires eleven yards of yarn to make one yard of flat web on the
two-post knitter.




[Illustration]

Circular Mat


A mat five inches in diameter requires two and one-half yards of round
web. Start sewing with the piece of worsted hanging from the end of the
web. Coil and sew in place by taking up the underhalf of a stitch on the
right, then the underhalf of a stitch on the left side usually called
"ball stitch." Continue alternating from right to left, taking up one
stitch at a time except when it is necessary to widen; then sew two
stitches of the web into one in the mat.

Run the end of sewing thread back in the sewing to fasten it. When
starting with a new sewing thread, put the needle in one inch back from
where sewing ended and run it through the work to where the last stitch
was taken.




[Illustration]

Ball for Baby


Use round web. Start with end of web and sew and coil as for round mat.
Widen only when necessary to keep it from drawing in too quickly. When
desired width or center of ball is reached, fill with tissue paper or a
ball of soft cotton. The sewing is then continued and each row narrowed
off by taking two stitches in part already sewed and one in the web.
When the same number of rows is narrowed the filling should be entirely
covered. The end left over will serve as a cord for the ball.

Flat web may be used by taking twelve pieces three inches long and
sewing them together--alternating color and white, if desired. Run a
draw-thread around the bottom and fill with paper or cotton; then run a
draw-thread around the top. Finish with a cord made of a piece of round
web.




[Illustration]

Doll's Muff


This will require three yards of round web. Sew the web into a
rectangular piece three inches wide and five inches long.

Join the three-inch ends together and draw up the ends a little to form
the muff. Finish with cord to go around the neck.




[Illustration]

Collarette


Round web five yards. Measure the doll's neck for collar. Gradually
widen each row in the back. Bring the third row of web down in front to
form the tabs; then up to the back of collarette and finish the back,
bringing the last row down in front into the tabs.

Paper patterns may be used as a guide, but children should be encouraged
to draw and cut their own patterns.




[Illustration]

Tam O' Shanter Cap


Measure the doll's head and make the top of the crown twice the diameter
of the head. It is sewed in the same way as the circular mat. When the
desired width of crown is obtained, begin the under side of the crown by
narrowing off--that is, taking two stitches in the crown and sewing them
into one stitch in the web. Continue until the desired opening for the
head is obtained. Two rows of web will complete the headband. Finish
with a pompon on top.

Use round web.




[Illustration]

Baby's Rattle


The foundation ring is made of a piece of splint or flat pith fifteen
inches long. Form this into a ring, having the ends lap two inches.

Wrap this with knitting cotton or yarn, being careful to keep winding
even. When the winding is completed, draw the end of cotton underneath
the winding with a needle to fasten it.

Use three pieces of round web for spokes. Fasten all three together in
the center. Bells may be sewed on the outside or inside of the ring.




[Illustration]

Toboggan Cap


To make a cap five inches long and four inches wide, knit eighty-four
inches of flat web. Begin five inches from the end of the web, turn and
sew into a rectangular form five inches wide and eight inches long.

Join the five-inch ends, and draw in the top with the needle and a piece
of the material from which the cap was made. After securing the top,
twist and fold the piece of yarn remaining for a cord and fasten a
number of strands of yarn through the loop for a tassel.




[Illustration]

Child's Bath or Bedroom Slippers


Length of sole, five and one-half inches. It is well to have the soles
before beginning to sew. They can be secured at any store.

Each slipper requires two and one-half yards of round web. Start at the
back of the heel (A, of illustration), and make the first two rows three
inches high, then gradually shorten the next three rows, and keep each
row this height until the instep is finished. The first row on the vamp
(B, of illustration) is made one inch higher than the side. Each row is
then gradually shortened, the last row being three-fourths of an inch
high (C, of illustration). This will complete one-half of the slipper.

The other half is made in just the reverse way by continuing the sewing
from the toe (C, of illustration) back to the heel, taking care that
each row is exactly the same height as the corresponding row on the
opposite side.

Join the back of the heel and sew to the soles before closing the vamp
in front. Sew vamp up the center by catching corresponding loops
together. Make cord and tassel to go around the top, as in illustration
of finished slippers.




[Illustration]

Small Mittens


Sixty inches of flat web will be required for each mitten. Cut off eight
pieces six inches long. In cutting, clip just one stitch and run the
ends across, and sew them into a cylindrical form. Draw in the top with
a needle and a piece of the material and fasten securely. Leave an
opening on one side for the thumb.

The thumb is made of three pieces sewed together. The longest piece is
three inches and the others each two and three-fourths inches long. In
sewing it into the mitten, have the longest piece come down toward the
wrist. Gradually form and sew it in place. Draw in the top and fasten
securely.


CORD

This is made of round web, knitted the desired length. The length will
vary a little according to size of the child, but four and one-half feet
is a good length. The mittens are fastened to the ends of the cord.




[Illustration]

Doll's Hood


This requires two yards of round web.

Start with the end of the web and sew into a circular form for the
crown. (See illustration A.) The sixth row is brought down to within one
inch of the center of the back. Turn and sew around to within one inch
from the center of the back on the opposite side. This will leave two
inches free in the back of the hood. Turn and continue sewing in this
way for five rows, which will form the side of hood.

The remaining part of the web is then brought around the face of the
hood and across the back, as one would sew a cord.

Finish with cord and tassel for tie-strings. A rosette of yarn may be
made for the top or side.




[Illustration]

Doll's Coat or Jacket


This may be made of round or flat web.

The coat is begun at the under-arm seam _a_. For a coat five inches long
begin three inches from the end of the web to make the first turn. Sew
from this turn to the starting end of the web _b_, fasten the sewing
thread and cut it off. The second row is made eleven inches long, or
long enough to go over the shoulder and down the back, _b_ to _c_.

Sew four rows in this way to form the front and part of the back; then
four rows five inches long for the back; then four more rows eleven
inches long for the other shoulder and front _d_ to _e_. Sew the fifth
or last row up three inches for the other under-arm seam.

Join the under-arm seams, leaving an opening of two inches for sleeves
if they are desired. If not, the armhole and neck can be finished off
with some contrasting color.

[Illustration]

For the sleeves, measure the length of the doll's arm and make the first
row this length. Make each row a little longer than the preceding row
until the top or shoulder part is reached, then gradually shorten each
row until the desired width is obtained. The last row should be the
same length as the first row. When sewing them in the coat, have the
longest part come at the top of the shoulder. Buttons are made by
braiding yarn and sewing it in the form of buttons.

A cord for fastening is made by braiding, or twisting and folding the
yarn. It is then sewed into loops or used as cord and tassel for tying.




[Illustration]

Bootees


Knit two yards of round web for each bootee.

Start two inches from the end of the web for the first turn. Sew into an
elliptical form three and one-half inches long for the sole. Sew two
more rows without widening for the sides of the foot; then sew two rows
across the front for the toe; the third row bring all around the top to
complete the foot.

The leg of the bootee is made by bringing the web directly upward three
inches before making the first turn. Make each row three inches high and
catch each row into the top of the foot while sewing. Put cord and
tassel around where the leg and foot meet.




[Illustration]

Little Boy Blue


Make coat according to directions given for doll's coat.

Measure the length of the doll's leg for the length of the trousers. Use
flat web and sew it into two rectangular pieces wide enough to make each
leg a little full.

Join the inside seams part way and then join the open edge of the right
front with the open edge of the left front. Do the same with the back
edges. Put a draw-string around the top, or a piece of the web may be
used for a waistband. Put in a draw-string around the bottom of each
leg.




[Illustration]

Little Red Riding-Hood


The doll shown in illustration is ten and one-half inches tall. To make
cape and hood in one piece sew two rows of flat web, six and one-half
inches long, for the center of the back. These two rows will also give
the desired fulness. The next five rows are made nineteen inches long,
or long enough to reach over the head and down to form the two sides of
the cape and hood. After these five rows are completed, sew five rows
six inches long on each side of the front of the cape, to make it wide
enough to meet across the chest.

Close the cape and the hood in the back. The part above the six and a
half inch rows will form the hood. Draw in the top of these two short
rows and sew to the base of the hood. Put in a draw-string around the
top of the right side of the cape in front, carry it around the base of
the hood, around the top of the cape on the left side and tie in front.




[Illustration]

Doll's Skirt


This skirt is five inches long and made of flat web. The first and last
rows are made one and a quarter inch shorter than the other rows forming
the skirt. These two rows are sewed together when the skirt is finished,
thus forming the placket and also the desired fulness in the back.

There are sixteen rows in all. Each two, when sewed together, form a
scollop at the top and bottom where the web is turned. In sewing care
must be taken to have each row the exact length of the preceding row
except in the first and last row.

The top of the skirt may be finished with a draw-string or a band made
from cloth. The bottom of the skirt may be left as it is, or be finished
with a blanket stitch of some contrasting color. The skirt requires five
yards of flat web.




[Illustration]

Little Boy's Hat


Measure the child's head for the size of the hat. Make the crown of the
hat one-half of this measurement. If the child's head measures
twenty-two inches around, make the crown eleven inches in diameter. The
crown is circular and is made in the same way as the circular mat,
taking two stitches of web and sewing them into one stitch of the crown
already sewed to keep it flat. When it is of the desired size, begin the
side by sewing one stitch of the web into one of the crown, at the same
time holding the web to be sewed directly under the last row in the
crown.

Make the side twice as long as the desired height of the hat. For
instance, if the desired height is to be three and a half inches, make
the side seven inches long, as one-half of this measurement is turned
up.

Two colors may be used, one color for the crown and one for the side.
Red and black or red and white are pretty combinations.

A doll's hat of the same style, the crown three and a half inches in
diameter, requires five yards of round web.




[Illustration]

Child's Muffler


This is a combination of flat and round web. Knit ten inches of flat
web, change to round web by bringing the yarn across the center of the
hole in the knitter to the opposite post, and knit ten inches, or the
number of inches necessary to go around the neck. Change again to flat
web, knit ten inches and clip off.

Make seven such pieces and sew them together to form the muffler. The
round web will form the neck part.

Do not remove from the knitter while changing from flat to round web.




[Illustration]

Child's Hood


This is made much in the same way as the doll's hood. Make the back of
the hood five inches in diameter, then turn the web and form the side.
Sew around to within four inches of the place of turning on the opposite
side and turn again. So continue until the side is sufficiently wide to
cover the child's head. Extend this side three inches beyond the desired
width, widening on each row of the extended part to give fulness. This
widening may be omitted, and the extended part turned back, leaving it
perfectly plain, if desired. Trim with rosettes or pompons made of the
same material as the hood.

Turn back the extended part and tack to the hood. Sew a pompon or a
rosette of yarn over the top of the sewing stitch. For tie-strings, use
cord and tassel, or ribbon.

The hood requires from twenty-five to thirty yards.




[Illustration]

Little Girl's Hat


This requires twenty-five yards of round web. Measure the child's head
for the size of the hat. Start the crown in the same way as the circular
mat. When it is five inches in diameter, gradually turn the crown, while
sewing the next five or six rows.

When the desired width is reached, begin forming the side by sewing one
stitch of web into one stitch of the crown, keeping each row exactly
under the preceding row until the desired height is obtained; then
gradually widen to form the rim, which is three and a half or four
inches broad.

Do not widen any on the last two rows, but draw the web a little tighter
while sewing to make the edge of the rim roll or turn inward.

Finish with cord and tassels around the crown, or pompons on the right
or left side of the front of the hat.




[Illustration]

Doll's Sweater


This is made of five and one-half yards of flat web cut into pieces of a
desired length. Cut three pieces seven inches long for the front. One
inch and a half of this will also form the neck. When cutting, clip only
one stitch and pull out the ends.

The next two pieces are cut five and one-half inches long and sewed one
on each side of the front one inch and a half below the top end. Each
succeeding row is made a little shorter to form the shoulder, the
shortest pieces forming the outside edges.

Make the back of the sweater in the same way and sew front and back
together, leaving one and a quarter inch opening on each side for the
sleeves.

The sleeve is made of five pieces, the longest piece being three inches,
and the shortest two and one-half inches long. Sew these pieces together
to form the sleeve. When sewing it into the sweater, place the longest
part at the shoulder seam and stretch the armhole while sewing it in.




[Illustration]

Wristlets


These are made of round or flat web. Each wristlet requires one and
one-half yards.

Measure five inches, the length of the wristlet, and turn. Start sewing
from this point and sew to the end of the five inches and turn again.

Continue until enough rows are sewed to make the wristlet the desired
width, which in this model is two and one-half inches.




[Illustration]

Shoulder Shawl


This may be made of round or flat web, and of any desired size. If the
shawl is to be thirty-six inches long, clip the web into pieces of this
length and sew them together until the shawl is of the desired width, or
the web may simply be turned at the end of each row, then proceed with
the sewing.

The fringe for the ends is made by cutting the yarn into lengths twice
as long as the desired length of the fringe--that is, if the fringe is
to be five inches long, cut the yarn into pieces ten inches long.

Fold each ten-inch piece in two, slip the folded end through a stitch in
the end of the shawl and draw the two ends of the piece through the loop
thus formed and pull tight.




[Illustration]

Doll's Carriage Robe


This robe is ten inches wide and eighteen inches long, and is made of
four pieces of flat web, each piece three yards long. Any number of
pieces of either round or flat web may be used, and the robe made wider
and longer if desired.

Measure fifteen inches of web and turn it. Begin sewing from this, turn
down to the end of the fifteen inches and again turn, bringing the web
around over the end. Care must be taken while turning to keep the ends
perfectly flat.

When the three yards are used begin the other parts in the same way.
Make four or any desired number of parts, and sew them together,
alternating the colors. Put a tassel made of the same material on the
rounded end of each part.

If round web is used it will require more for each part, for the round
is not as wide as the flat web.




[Illustration]

Child's Leggings


Leggings may be made of round or flat web. Measure five inches above the
knee down to the vamp of the shoe for the length of the front part of
the legging. This gives the length of the first row.

Turn the web and begin to sew from this point up to the top, then turn
again and sew down to the toe. Continue in this way until the front part
is two and one-half inches wide.

Bring the remaining rows down to within two inches of the end of the
toe, until the legging is wide enough to go around the child's leg, then
sew to the opposite side of the front. Sew a piece of tape to the
instep.




[Illustration]

Muffler


This may be made of round or flat web. Make the part to go around the
neck first. In this model the neck band is ten inches long and three
inches wide. Sew four rows of flat or six rows of round web for the
neck. Begin three inches from the ends to make the front. Gradually
shorten each row until it is of the desired length.

Make loops of twisted yarn and sew to one end of the neck band to slip
over the buttons. Sew the buttons on the opposite end and on the inside
where they will be hidden while the muffler is being worn.




Made of Knitting Cotton


Knitting cotton can be secured at any department store. It comes in
colors white, black, red, navy blue, and mixed colors. This is not as
elastic as worsted and is used where strength is required, such as bags,
hammocks, wash-cloths, etc. It is very inexpensive and can be used to
great advantage.




[Illustration]

Jumping Rope


Select a piece of jute, or stout cord the length of the desired rope.
Drop one end of this and one end of the knitting cotton through the hole
in the knitter (use knitter having four posts), and draw it out at the
other end three inches. Bring the cotton leading from the ball around
each post once, then proceed with the knitting, covering the cord or
jute which is used as a core or foundation for the rope.

Cords for pillow tops may also be made in this way.




[Illustration]

Toy Horse Reins


These are made of coarse knitting cotton on four-post knitters. Knit a
piece three yards long for the reins. The children measure each other
for the breast-piece, which will be from ten to twelve inches long. This
is fastened to the reins nine inches below the center of the neck on
each side, to allow the head to pass through easily.

Two colors may be used in knitting the reins, working around first with
one color, then with the other.

Fourteen yards of knitting cotton will make one yard of web on the
four-post knitter.




[Illustration]

Wash Cloth


This is made of white knitting cotton. It requires nine yards of web for
a cloth ten by twelve inches. Measure twelve inches of web, turn and sew
toward the end.

When the twelve-inch piece is sewed turn again and sew. Continue in this
way until the desired size is obtained.

With a piece of the cotton make a loop at one corner by which to hang
it.




[Illustration]

School Bag


This may be made of round or flat web. A bag twelve inches deep and
fourteen inches wide requires thirty yards. Measure twenty-four inches
of web and turn. Begin sewing from this turn to the end of the
twenty-four inches then turn again. So continue until this oblong piece
measures fourteen by twenty-four inches. Fold this in two and sew up the
sides. This will avoid any seam in the bottom of the bag.

Make handles in the same way as for jumping-rope, or a double thickness
of the web may be used for each handle and sewed to the top sides of the
bag. Finish by sewing a piece of the web around the top.

Laundry bags, sewing bags, and little bags for holding paints and
water-dish may be made in similar way.




[Illustration]

Chimney Cleaner


This is made of white knitting cotton. It requires two yards of flat or
three yards of round web.

Secure a piece of stick or better still a piece of half-inch dowel ten
or twelve inches long, for a handle. Cut a groove with a knife around
one end to keep the web from slipping off.

Sew the web into loops three and a half or four inches long. Draw them
in around the end of the handle with the sewing string just in the
groove; then wind the sewing string around two or three times, tie, and
clip off the ends.




[Illustration]

Doll's Hammock


This is made of flat web. A hammock eight by twelve inches requires five
and one-half yards. Sew this into an oblong piece twelve inches long and
eight inches wide.

Secure a piece of cardboard three inches longer than the oblong piece
and one inch wider.

Round off the corners with a pair of scissors (see illustration), and
cut notches or slits in ends one-half inch apart. Sew two brass rings in
the center of one side, and on the other baste the oblong piece which is
to be used for the hammock. Then with a needle and a long piece of the
knitting cotton begin making the ends of the hammock by securing one end
of the sewing string to the hammock and bring it over the end of the
cardboard in the first slit from the end and through the ring on the
opposite side of cardboard; back over cardboard, through second slit and
through hammock.

So continue until one end is finished. Do the same with the other end.
These strings may be held in place by putting three or four rows of
weaving just underneath the rings.

Clip the basting stitches and remove from the cardboard. Make fringe as
for shawl.

